doc: Improve Tor docs (#21157)
bitcoin/bitcoin: doc/tor.md

    -onion=ip:port  Set the proxy server to use for Tor onion services. You do not
                    need to set this if it's the same as -proxy. You can use -onion=0
                    to explicitly disable access to onion services.

> **Note:** _Only the -proxy option sets the proxy for DNS requests with -onion they will not route over Tor, so use -proxy if you have privacy concerns._

Reviewer: missing semi-colon
```suggestion
**Note:** _Only the -proxy option sets the proxy for DNS requests; with -onion they will not route over Tor, so use -proxy if you have privacy concerns._
```

> **Note:** _Only the -proxy option sets the proxy for DNS requests; with -onion they will not route over Tor, so use -proxy if you have privacy concerns._

Reviewer: This change breaks up the formatting. I think it is better in the -onion section where it is currently and where it directly relates.

Author: Sorry I don't agree with this. I tried different things to highlight this part so that a user reading this doc for the first time do not miss this information. Or it will be helpful if you could suggest me a better way to highlight this.

Reviewer: Sure. Can you keep the current position and *italicize* it to highlight it? This is a list of config options and it would be good to not break it up in the middle.

Reviewer: > it will be helpful if you could suggest me a better way to highlight this.

Sure! Can you keep the current position and *italicize this part* or use **bold characters** to highlight it? This is a list of config options and it would be good to not break it up in the middle.

Author: I couldn't find a way to use italic or bold in a code block indented with four spaces.

Author: - 2 config options to set proxy
- Highlighted text about those options
- Other config options below

LGTM

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13405205/117246703-b6143780-ae5a-11eb-8078-d45a866459a8.png)

Reviewer: If you really want to pull out this text, why not place it at the top or the bottom of the list? Still, as this text refers to the `-onion` option, in my opinion it should remain there.

Reviewer: Do you plan to address this?

Author: I am not sure if there is any other better way to highlight this. Top and Bottom will not be useful. A newbie or even a power user needs to read this while going to through proxy options. Highlighting DNS was one of the important parts of this PR (mentioned in description) as I have seen lot of people ignore it and DNS leaks affecting their privacy.

Reviewer: I think it's in the right place already.

Reviewer 2: This adds the bold formatting as @jonatack requested: https://github.com/harding/bitcoin/blob/095310798bc0622498515cf6d5c772a01c60c7c5/doc/tor.md

```diff
diff --git a/doc/tor.md b/doc/tor.md
index 2640a6109..31fa4f554 100644
--- a/doc/tor.md
+++ b/doc/tor.md
@@ -25,6 +25,7 @@ knows when upgrading to current and future Tor releases that support Tor v3 only
 The first step is running Bitcoin Core behind a Tor proxy. This will already anonymize all
 outgoing connections, but more is possible.
 
+<pre>
     -proxy=ip:port  Set the proxy server. If SOCKS5 is selected (default), this proxy
                     server will be used to try to reach .onion addresses as well.
                     You need to use -noonion or -onion=0 to explicitly disable
@@ -33,7 +34,7 @@ outgoing connections, but more is possible.
     -onion=ip:port  Set the proxy server to use for Tor onion services. You do not
                     need to set this if it's the same as -proxy. You can use -onion=0
                     to explicitly disable access to onion services.
-                    Note: Only the -proxy option sets the proxy for DNS requests;
+                    <b>Note:</b> Only the -proxy option sets the proxy for DNS requests;
                     with -onion they will not route over Tor, so use -proxy if you
                     have privacy concerns.
 
@@ -54,6 +55,7 @@ outgoing connections, but more is possible.
                     connections will be enabled when you use -proxy or -onion. Use
                     -noonion or -onion=0 if you want to be sure there are no outbound
                     onion connections over the default proxy or your defined -proxy.
+</pre>
 
 In a typical situation, this suffices to run behind a Tor proxy:
 
```

Author: Cool. I will make this change. I was trying bold and italic without `<pre></pre>` tags

Author: Implemented the suggestion in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/a51c1b795544238f534c7273c9382357e44b05a6

Manual](https://2019.www.torproject.org/docs/tor-manual.html.en) for more
details).

> ## Example: creating an onion service on Debian/Ubuntu systems

Reviewer 3: I would say you should move this to the bottom of the file as the final section. I would suppose the guide is for someone who has never set up a tor service for bitcoin or has very little experience using tor. Moving it to the bottom would mean this user has, hopefully, read the doc from top to bottom. Then, they can get on setting it up with an example.

Reviewer 3: I would also refactor this whole section:
- Current bullet formatting looks akward
- Change the title so that a common naming format can be used if we want to add a guide for another system
  - From: `Example: creating an onion service on Debian/Ubuntu Systems`
  - To: `Setup Guide: Debian/Ubuntu`
- Better explanations per each step 

Here is how that would look. This is just a rough suggestion, so make contextual additions as you see fit:

## Setup Guide: Debian/Ubuntu

Assuming you already have an installation of Bitcoin Core:

##### 1. Install Tor:

To install Tor, run:

``` bash
sudo apt install tor
```

##### 2. Edit Tor configuration file:

open up the `torrc` file with your favorite text editor, this example uses the `nano` text editor:

``` bash
sudo nano /etc/tor/torrc
```

Edit the `torrc` file so that it has these settings:

```
ControlPort 9051
CookieAuthentication 1
CookieAuthFileGroupReadable 1
```

##### 3. Add user to Tor group:

``` bash
sudo usermod -a -G debian-tor satoshi
```

##### 4. Restart Tor

To restart Tor, run:

```
sudo systemctl restart tor
```

##### 5. Edit Bitcoin configuration file

Open up the `bitcoin.conf` file with your favorite text editor.
Edit the file so that it contains these settings:

```
listen=1
torcontrol=127.0.0.1:9051
debug=tor
```

##### 6. Confirmation
You should be all set up to run a node through the Tor Network.
You can confirm that everything is setup correctly by running the `getnetworkinfo` 
RPC command. The result should look something like this:

```
localaddresses": [
  {
    "address": "omy7kj7zwvfg5luayideh73uqb2latkoyyy5h65y4atv3fymnlxlzwqd.onion",
    "port": 8333,
    "score": 4
  }
]
```

Author: @jarolrod Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21157/commits/db59179fbddfb6cfb08365398fe53e862e57d845

Manual](https://2019.www.torproject.org/docs/tor-manual.html.en) for more
details).

> ## Example: Bitcoin Core Onion Service on Ubuntu 20.04.2 LTS

Author: Changed header. Maybe some content can be changed or rephrased but one example is required. I was considering adding Windows and Android with screenshots as well but then dropped the idea because others may not agree to it.

- Assuming Bitcoin Core already exists on this machine.

   Install Tor:

  `sudo apt install tor`

   Setup Control Port:

  `sudo nano /etc/tor/torrc`

>   Add below lines and save:

Reviewer: These lines are usually already present (as explained above)
```suggestion
  Ensure that `torrc` has these settings, and save:
```

  ```
  ControlPort 9051
  CookieAuthentication 1
  CookieAuthFileGroupReadable 1
  ```

>   Add user('satoshi' in this example) to Tor group:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Add user ("satoshi" in this example) to the Tor group:
```

  `sudo usermod -a -G debian-tor satoshi`

  Restart Tor:

  `sudo systemctl restart tor`

- Details of `bitcoin.conf` file:

  ```
  listen=1
  torcontrol=127.0.0.1:9051

>   onlynet=onion

Author: Interesting. Curious about the reason because this will only connect to peers via Tor.

>   onlynet=onion

Reviewer 4: It's a trade-off. Only connecting out over Tor is more private of course when you combine it with no reachable IPv4/IPv6 address, in particular if you want to broadcast transactions without them being correlatable with your IP.

On the other hand, if you only make random Tor connections, you're much more vulnerable to Sybil attacks (as Tor addresses have 0 cost to create, an attacker can just flood the network with 1000s of apparent Tor Bitcoin nodes, and have a high probability of receiving all outbound Tor connections a Tor-only node makes). This is significantly less a concern with IPv4/IPv6 (especially with asmap) due to cost of getting IPs in many networks. It's also less a concern if you have `-addnode`d connections to trusted peers (even if they're onion addresses).

>   onlynet=onion

Reviewer: For example, search on "onlynet" in https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Setting_up_a_Tor_hidden_service

"not particularly recommended...if everyone used onlynet=onion nobody on the onion bitcoin chain would be able to communicate with the clearnet chain. It is essential that some nodes access both clearnet and Tor."

>   onlynet=onion

Author: Thanks for the details. Will be helpful.

Removed in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21157/commits/99c1e1521018a3fa5e59bb0dce1ddd39d94cb3cb

  debug=tor
  ```
- Result for `getnetworkinfo`:

  ```
  localaddresses": [
    {
      "address": "omy7kj7zwvfg5luayideh73uqb2latkoyyy5h65y4atv3fymnlxlzwqd.onion",

>       "port": 18333,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "port": 8333,
```

  Otherwise it is trivial to link them, which may reduce privacy. Onion
  services created automatically (as in section 2) always have only one port
  open.

- In some regions of the world usage of the Tor network is monitored and/or blocked.
  If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections or the use
  of Tor bridges, then considering the trade-offs, it may not be safe to use Tor.
  Another option for Bitcoin network privacy is to use I2P (option `i2p`).

- For maximum privacy, it is preferable to disable listening instead of running an

>   onion service.

Author: > I interpret this paragraph as advice to people to be careful in regions where Tor is legally disallowed or discouraged. I would suspect that places that legally ban Tor also legally ban I2P

Agree. Governments consider use of Tor or i2p or VPN same in such places. Initially `i2p` was not mentioned, i2p was recently merged and it was suggested that we can mention it as an alternative here. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21157#discussion_r598287120

> I think "listening" in this context is a technical term readers might not understand. I suggest replacing with "disable accepting incoming connections".

Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/16db258eafa21328b9433c2da6dce6fbc8f532de

>   onion service.

Reviewer 2: I continue to believe this is not the correct location to mention I2P.  I think putting it here gives the misleading impression that I2P has a different legal status than Tor.  My personal suggestion would be to remove the I2P mention for now, wait for a PR adding I2P docs to be added, and then cross link the two documents from their opening paragraphs (i.e. Tor doc links to I2P doc; I2P doc links to Tor doc).

That said, I don't feel strongly enough about this for it to be a blocker.

>   onion service.

Author: Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/bef89aff859849a64121f039cbdbb81468c9a455

- Users can download packages with [torsocks](https://gitlab.torproject.org/legacy/trac/-/wikis/doc/torsocks) for better security and privacy.

- Trade-offs involved in using `onlynet=onion`:

  The `onlynet=onion` configuration option can potentially ensure the node only attempts to connect over
  the Tor network. The decision to use this option should consider the following trade-offs:

  Only connecting over Tor is more private when you combine it with no reachable IPv4/IPv6 address,
  in particular if you want to broadcast transactions without them being correlatable with your IP.

  **Sybil Attacks**

  On the other hand, if you only make random Tor connections, you're much more vulnerable to Sybil attacks.
  As Tor addresses may be created at no cost, an attacker can potentially flood the network with many Tor
  nodes and receive all of the outbound Tor connections an `onlynet=tor` node makes.
  This is significantly less a concern with IPv4/IPv6 (especially with asmap) due to cost of getting IPs in many

>   networks. It's also less a concern if you have `-addnode` connections to trusted peers (even if they're onion addresses).

Author: Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/16db258eafa21328b9433c2da6dce6fbc8f532de However I mentioned _blockchain with most cumulative “chainwork”_ instead of _best block chain_

  **Network Partitioning**

>   If too many nodes use `onlynet=onion`, it could become difficult for onion nodes to communicate with clearnet nodes.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  If too many nodes use `onlynet=onion`, it could become difficult for onion nodes to communicate with clearnet nodes, preventing them to stay in sync with the rest of the network.
```

Author: Done. Made changes according to https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21157#discussion_r613376720

>   If too many nodes use `onlynet=onion`, it could become difficult for onion nodes to communicate with clearnet nodes.

Author: Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/16db258eafa21328b9433c2da6dce6fbc8f532de

>   It is essential that some nodes access both clearnet and Tor or use `onlynet=i2p` with `onlynet=onion`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  It is essential that some nodes access both clearnet and Tor, or use `onlynet=i2p` with `onlynet=onion`.
```

Author: Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/16db258eafa21328b9433c2da6dce6fbc8f532de I did some research about use of comma before `or` in any sentence and found that sometimes Programming Languages are easier tot understand compared to English.

## Setup Guide: Debian/Ubuntu

Assuming you already have an installation of Bitcoin Core:

**1. Install Tor:**

To install Tor, run:

```
sudo apt install tor
```

**2. Edit Tor configuration file:**

Open the `torrc` file with your text editor. This example uses nano:

```
sudo nano /etc/tor/torrc
```
Ensure that `torrc` has these settings, and save:

```
ControlPort 9051
CookieAuthentication 1
CookieAuthFileGroupReadable 1
```

**3. Add user to Tor group ("satoshi" in this example):**

```
sudo usermod -a -G debian-tor satoshi
```

**4. Restart System**

```
sudo reboot
```

**5. Edit Bitcoin configuration file**

> Open the `bitcoin.conf` file with your text editor.

Reviewer 2: This should probably at least link to instructions about where to find your configuration directory, e.g. https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Running_Bitcoin#Bitcoin.conf_Configuration_File

(Maybe an idea would be to have `bitcoin -version` or another option that can be run concurrent with the main program report the full path to the various used directories.)

Author: > This should probably at least link to instructions about where to find your configuration directory, e.g. en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Running_Bitcoin#Bitcoin.conf_Configuration_File

Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/16db258eafa21328b9433c2da6dce6fbc8f532de

> (Maybe an idea would be to have bitcoin -version or another option that can be run concurrent with the main program report the full path to the various used directories.)

Maybe can add information about [files](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/files.md) in `bitcoind -help` results?

Edit the file so that it contains these settings:

```
listen=1
torcontrol=127.0.0.1:9051
debug=tor
```

**6. Confirmation**

You should be all set up to run a node through the Tor Network.
You can confirm that everything is set up correctly by running the `getnetworkinfo`
RPC command. The result should contain an address corresponding to your onion service:

```

> localaddresses": [

Reviewer 2: Opening quote missing from the RPC results.

Suggestion: show the `getnetworkinfo` RPC being run here using `bitcoin-cli`, e.g.:

```bash
$ bitcoin-cli getnetworkinfo
"localaddresses": [
...
```

Reviewer: yes, note that this is simpler if `-netinfo` is used instead of `getnetworkinfo`, it's a shorter command and the output is simpler to parse

Author: Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/16db258eafa21328b9433c2da6dce6fbc8f532de

  Otherwise it is trivial to link them, which may reduce privacy. Onion
  services created automatically (as in section 2) always have only one port
  open.

- In some regions of the world usage of the Tor network is monitored and/or blocked.
  If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections or the use
  of Tor bridges, then considering the trade-offs, it may not be safe to use Tor.

>   Another option for Bitcoin network privacy is to use I2P (option `i2p`).

Reviewer 6: What is I2P (option `i2p`)?

Reviewer: I2P is the Invisible Internet Project, a second privacy network that was added to Bitcoin Core for the upcoming release￼￼.

I've written some docs for an initial doc/i2p.md file her , just need to overcome my desire to avoid bikeshedding to propose it 😛

Author: @jonatack You know more about this PR, Tor and related things. I am closing it. I am not Blue but you can always use things in a new PR if it helps Core. I won't ever mislead people about Core.

  As Tor addresses may be created at no cost, an attacker can potentially flood the network with many Tor
  nodes and receive all of the outbound Tor connections an `onlynet=tor` node makes.
  This is significantly less a concern with IPv4/IPv6 (especially with asmap) due to cost of getting IPs in many
  networks. It's also less a concern if you have `-addnode` connections to trusted peers (even if they're onion addresses).

  **Network Partitioning**

  If too many nodes use `onlynet=onion`, it could become difficult for onion nodes to communicate with clearnet nodes.
  It is essential that some nodes access both clearnet and Tor or use `onlynet=i2p` with `onlynet=onion`.

## Setup Guide: Debian/Ubuntu

Assuming you already have an installation of Bitcoin Core:

**1. Install Tor:**

To install Tor, run:

```
sudo apt install tor
```

**2. Edit Tor configuration file:**

Open the `torrc` file with your text editor. This example uses nano:

```
sudo nano /etc/tor/torrc
```
Ensure that `torrc` has these settings, and save:

```
ControlPort 9051
CookieAuthentication 1
CookieAuthFileGroupReadable 1
```

**3. Add user to Tor group ("satoshi" in this example):**

```

> sudo usermod -a -G debian-tor satoshi

Author: I think we will get permission error if we don't reboot system after adding user to Tor group. So maybe `4` can be replaced by `sudo reboot`. Let me know if you test these steps on Ubuntu @michaelfolkson

Reviewer 6: The note to reboot after using usermod exists in the latest commit e1604b3 from Feb 4.

  Otherwise it is trivial to link them, which may reduce privacy. Onion
  services created automatically (as in section 2) always have only one port
  open.

- In some regions of the world usage of the Tor network is monitored and/or blocked.
  If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections or the use
  of Tor bridges, then considering the trade-offs, it may not be safe to use Tor. Other

>   options for privacy in Bitcoin Core: i2p.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Another option for Bitcoin network privacy is to use I2P (option `i2p`).
```

- For maximum privacy, it is preferable to disable listening instead of running an
  onion service.

- Users can download packages with [torsocks](https://gitlab.torproject.org/legacy/trac/-/wikis/doc/torsocks) for better security and privacy.

- Trade-offs involved in using `onlynet=onion`:

>   Placing onlynet=onion in your bitcoin.conf file will ensure that your node only attempts to connect over

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The `onlynet=onion` configuration option can potentially ensure the node only attempts to connect over
```

>   Placing onlynet=onion in your bitcoin.conf file will ensure that your node only attempts to connect over

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The `onlynet=onion` configuration option can potentially ensure the node only attempts to connect over
```

(note, config options may be used on the command line as well as in the conf file)

>   the Tor network, thus maximizing the benefits of using Tor. The decision to use this option should consider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the Tor network. The decision to use this option should consider
```

  the following trade-offs:

  Only connecting over Tor is more private when you combine it with no reachable IPv4/IPv6 address,
  in particular if you want to broadcast transactions without them being correlatable with your IP.

  **Sybil Attacks**

>   On the other hand, if you only make random Tor connections, you're much more vulnerable to Sybil attacks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  On the other hand, if you only make random Tor connections, you're much more vulnerable to Sybil attacks.
```

>   (as Tor addresses have 0 cost to create, an attacker can just flood the network with 1000s of apparent Tor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  As Tor addresses may be created at no cost, an attacker can potentially flood the network with many Tor
```

>   Bitcoin nodes, and have a high probability of receiving all outbound Tor connections a Tor-only node makes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  nodes and receive all of the outbound Tor connections an `onlynet=tor` node makes.
```

  This is significantly less a concern with IPv4/IPv6 (especially with asmap) due to cost of getting IPs in many
  networks. It's also less a concern if you have `-addnode` connections to trusted peers (even if they're onion addresses).

  **Network Partitioning**

>   If everyone used `onlynet=onion` nobody on the onion bitcoin chain would be able to communicate with the clearnet chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If too many nodes use `onlynet=onion`, it could become difficult for onion nodes to communicate with clearnet nodes.
```

  It is essential that some nodes access both clearnet and Tor or use `onlynet=i2p` with `onlynet=onion`.

## Setup Guide: Debian/Ubuntu

Assuming you already have an installation of Bitcoin Core:

**1. Install Tor:**

To install Tor, run:

```
sudo apt install tor
```

**2. Edit Tor configuration file:**

> open up the `torrc` file with your favorite text editor, this example uses the `nano` text editor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the `torrc` file with your text editor. This example uses nano:
```

```
sudo nano /etc/tor/torrc
```
Ensure that `torrc` has these settings, and save:

```
ControlPort 9051
CookieAuthentication 1
CookieAuthFileGroupReadable 1
```

**3. Add user to Tor group ("satoshi" in this example):**

```
sudo usermod -a -G debian-tor satoshi
```

**4. Restart Tor**

To restart Tor, run:

```
sudo systemctl restart tor
```

**5. Edit Bitcoin configuration file**

> Open up the bitcoin.conf file with your favorite text editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the `bitcoin.conf` file with your text editor.
```

Edit the file so that it contains these settings:

```
listen=1
torcontrol=127.0.0.1:9051
debug=tor
```

**6. Confirmation**

You should be all set up to run a node through the Tor Network.

> You can confirm that everything is setup correctly by running the getnetworkinfo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can confirm that everything is set up correctly by running the `getnetworkinfo`
```

> RPC command. The result should contain address for onion service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RPC command. The result should contain an address corresponding to your onion service:
```

  Otherwise it is trivial to link them, which may reduce privacy. Onion
  services created automatically (as in section 2) always have only one port
  open.

> - In some regions of the world usage of the Tor network is monitored and/or blocked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In some regions of the world the Tor network is monitored and/or blocked.
```

Author: Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/6bf33db373588582c85ee537cd5e9302c593cb02

  If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections or the use
  of Tor bridges, then considering the trade-offs, it may not be safe to use Tor.

- For maximum privacy, it is preferable to disable accepting incoming connections.

- Users can download packages with [torsocks](https://gitlab.torproject.org/legacy/trac/-/wikis/doc/torsocks) for better security and privacy.

- Trade-offs involved in using `onlynet=onion`:

  The `onlynet=onion` configuration option can potentially ensure the node only attempts to connect over

>   the Tor network. The decision to use this option should consider the following trade-offs:

Reviewer: The first sentence is repeating the `onlynet` docs, but less precisely. Suggest dropping this paragraph completely. Brevity is good.

Author: > The first sentence is repeating the onlynet docs

Which docs?

> The second sentence repeats the bullet point.

Removed it.

Reviewer: > > The first sentence is repeating the onlynet docs
> 
> Which docs?
 
The description in the list of options.

Author: Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/cb46911a3b09f126eeb40e02234d8ca57757e3d6

  Only connecting over Tor is more private when you combine it with no reachable IPv4/IPv6 address,
  in particular if you want to broadcast transactions without them being correlatable with your IP.

  **Sybil Attacks**

  On the other hand, if you only make random Tor connections, you're much more vulnerable to Sybil attacks.
  As Tor addresses may be created at no cost, an attacker can potentially flood the network with many Tor
  nodes and receive all of the outbound Tor connections an `onlynet=tor` node makes.

>   This is significantly less a concern with IPv4/IPv6 (especially with asmap) due to cost of getting IPs in many

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This is significantly less a concern with IPv4/IPv6 (especially with asmap) due to the cost of obtaining IPs in many
```

Author: Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/6bf33db373588582c85ee537cd5e9302c593cb02

>   networks. It's also less a concern if you have `-addnode` connections to trusted peers (even if they're onion addresses).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  networks. It's also alleviated if you establish `-addnode` connections to trusted peers (even if they're onion addresses).
```

Author: Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/6bf33db373588582c85ee537cd5e9302c593cb02

  If all of your connections are controlled by a Sybil attacker, they can easily prevent you from seeing confirmed transactions
  and, with more difficulty, even trick your node into falsely reporting a transaction as confirmed on the blockchain with most
  cumulative “chainwork”.

  **Network Partitioning**

  If too many nodes use `onlynet=onion`, it could become difficult for onion nodes to communicate with clearnet nodes,
  preventing the Tor network from seeing recent transactions and blocks. It is essential that some nodes access both
  clearnet and Tor, or use `onlynet=i2p` with `onlynet=onion`.

## Setup Guide: Debian/Ubuntu

Assuming you already have an installation of Bitcoin Core:

**1. Install Tor:**

To install Tor, run:

```
sudo apt install tor
```

**2. Edit Tor configuration file:**

Open the `torrc` file with your text editor. This example uses nano:

```
sudo nano /etc/tor/torrc
```
Ensure that `torrc` has these settings, and save:

```
ControlPort 9051
CookieAuthentication 1
CookieAuthFileGroupReadable 1
```

**3. Add user to Tor group ("satoshi" in this example):**

```
sudo usermod -a -G debian-tor satoshi
```

**4. Restart System**

```

> sudo reboot

Reviewer: I think you can drop the `sudo` instructions in this section. They are context-dependent.

Author: As mentioned in this answer: https://askubuntu.com/a/1006034, `sudo` is mentioned in most of the tutorials for compatibility reasons and these steps in the example are included for all newbies who are trying Bitcoin Core with Tor for the first time on Ubuntu or other Debian based Linux distributions.

```

**5. Edit Bitcoin configuration file**

Open the `bitcoin.conf` [file](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Running_Bitcoin#Bitcoin.conf_Configuration_File) with your text editor.
Edit the file so that it contains these settings:

```
listen=1
torcontrol=127.0.0.1:9051
debug=tor
```

**6. Confirmation**

You should be all set up to run a node through the Tor Network.

> You can confirm that everything is set up correctly by using `getnetworkinfo` or `-netinfo`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can confirm that everything is set up correctly by running `getnetworkinfo` or `-netinfo` and checking that the local addresses they return includes the onion service.
```

This would allow dropping the rest after this.

Author: Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/6bf33db373588582c85ee537cd5e9302c593cb02

  networks. It's also alleviated if you make `-addnode` connections to trusted peers (even if they're onion addresses).

  If all of your connections are controlled by a Sybil attacker, they can easily prevent you from seeing confirmed transactions
  and, with more difficulty, even trick your node into falsely reporting a transaction as confirmed on the blockchain with most
  cumulative “chainwork”.

  **Network Partitioning**

  If too many nodes use `onlynet=onion`, it could become difficult for onion nodes to communicate with clearnet nodes,
  preventing the Tor network from seeing recent transactions and blocks. It is essential that some nodes access both
  clearnet and Tor, or use `onlynet=i2p` with `onlynet=onion`.

## Setup Guide: Debian/Ubuntu

Assuming you already have an installation of Bitcoin Core:

**1. Install Tor:**

To install Tor, run:

```
sudo apt install tor
```

**2. Edit Tor configuration file:**

Open the `torrc` file with your text editor. This example uses nano:

```
sudo nano /etc/tor/torrc
```
Ensure that `torrc` has these settings, and save:

```

> ControlPort 9051

Reviewer 7: In my experience this was the only line needed. I haven't needed the following two lines on any of my nodes.

Author: `listen` is 1 by default except if `proxy` is used so maybe we can remove this line or add `proxy` as well.

`debug=tor` is for logs

Author: Added proxy in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/cb46911a3b09f126eeb40e02234d8ca57757e3d6

Author: @rebroad Just realized this comment was about Tor config file. Sorry I thought its about torcontrol in bitcoin.conf

Are you using torpassword in bitcoin.conf?

  Otherwise it is trivial to link them, which may reduce privacy. Onion
  services created automatically (as in section 2) always have only one port
  open.

> - Some states have the ability to monitor and block use of the Tor network.

Reviewer 8: nit: Perhaps instead of "Some states have the ability to monitor and block use of the Tor network."

In some regions of the world usage of the Tor network is monitored and/or blocked.

>   Recent examples include China and India. If you are in an environment that

Reviewer 8: nit: "Recent examples include China and India."

I'd rather take out specific examples of countries to make it softer. I don't think we want to be unnecessarily antagonistic to national governments for no upside. The priority for this PR is that users have access to good documentation on how to use Tor rather than documenting where those users likely are.

Author: Removed

  does not permit direct Tor connections or the use of Tor bridges, then
  considering the trade-offs, it may not be safe to use the Tor network.

- For maximal privacy, disabling listening may be preferable to running an
  onion service.

> - Users can download packages with [torsocks](https://gitlab.torproject.org/legacy/trac/-/wikis/doc/torsocks) for better security and privacy.

Author: We have only one file in `doc` for Tor so I think its okay to suggest users about downloading packages with `torsocks` as a privacy recommendation. Suggested by @RiccardoMasutti in this PR

> - Users can download packages with [torsocks](https://gitlab.torproject.org/legacy/trac/-/wikis/doc/torsocks) for better security and privacy.

Reviewer 9: I don't like recommending this here. What kind of packages? Also there are security trade-offs to downloading software over Tor. No need to get into that here.

> - Users can download packages with [torsocks](https://gitlab.torproject.org/legacy/trac/-/wikis/doc/torsocks) for better security and privacy.

Reviewer: I agree this sentence raises more questions than it answers.

> - Trade-offs involved in using `onlynet=onion`:

Reviewer 3: Here is how I would re-word this section. I feel that this encapsulates what you want to get across:

#### Trade-offs of the `onlynet=onion` configuration option:

The privacy benefits of Tor are affected if a Tor-Bitcoin service node is reachable by IPv4/IPv6 nodes. Placing `onlynet=onion` in your bitcoin.conf file will ensure that your node only attempts to connect over the Tor network, thus maximizing the benefits of using Tor. The decision to use this option should consider the following trade-offs:

**Sybil Attacks**
While Sybil attacks are a threat on clearnet networks, it is of greater concern on the Tor network. A node that only maintains connections over Tor is vulnerable to a Sybil attack because of the minimal cost of creating a Tor address. This minimal cost means that an attacker can flood the network with thousands of apparent Tor-Bitcoin nodes controlled by the attacker.

One way to mitigate this is by leaving out the `onlynet=onion` configuration option, which will allow connections to IPv4/IPv6 nodes. Clearnet IPs have a greater creation cost, making it harder for an attacker to carry out a successful Sybil attack. 

**Network Partitioning**
If every Tor-Bitcoin node ran using the `onlynet=onion` configuration option, no Tor node would communicate with the clearnet network. This would result in the Bitcoin network becoming partitioned. For the health of the Bitcoin network as a whole, some nodes must communicate among both clearnet and Tor. You can help prevent this scenario by excluding the `onlynet=onion` configuration option.

Author: No issues in rephrasing as long as we share important things with users in the docs. What are your thoughts on this suggestion? Cc: @sipa @jonatack

Reviewer: Now that I2P support is merged, adding another privacy network, this may need some updating.

Reviewer 10: Isn't the sybil concern partially mitigated, or at least changed, by the fact that Tor onion connection are anonymous? The attacker won't be able to pick you and sybil specifically you, potentially without you even knowing. 
The attacker will instead have to sybil the whole network, which is a much more complex and easier to spot thing.

Is correct to say that in this context there is a trade-off between targeted and non-targeted sybilling? And should it be mentioned?

Author: @jonatack which part? I2P will have a separate file `i2p.md` as discussed in other PR so this can still be focused on Tor and related things?

Reviewer: > @jonatack which part?

the onlynet discussion

Reviewer: > @jonatack which part?

The onlynet discussion and the "when to use tor" discussion... tor is no longer the only privacy network bitcoind can use, so for example, running onlynet=tor along with onlynet=i2p may be worth discussing. There may be reasons to prefer running both over onlynet=tor alone.

Author: > The onlynet discussion

Agree. This can be changed and will need comments from people who are more experienced to compare Tor and i2p usage in Bitcoin Core. TBH I have not used i2p much. Also not sure what should be added here and what will be included in `i2p.md`.

> "when to use/not use tor" discussion

The line added in this PR focuses on Tor and Tor bridges so I don't think it should be changed (with or without i2p reasons to avoid Tor in some parts remains the same). Maybe we can add one more "Privacy Recommendation" later in other PR.

Quoting the exact line I am talking about (Privacy Recommendation 2): 

_Some states have the ability to monitor and block use of the Tor network. Recent examples include China and India. If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections or the use of Tor bridges, then considering the trade-offs, it may not be safe to use the Tor network._

> tor is no longer the only privacy network bitcoind can use, so for example, running onlynet=tor along with onlynet=i2p may be worth discussing.

Agree Tor isnt the only option now but this PR and file `tor.md` is for Tor. 

> There may be reasons to prefer running both over onlynet=tor alone.

Maybe

Author: > Is correct to say that in this context there is a trade-off between targeted and non-targeted sybilling? And should it be mentioned?

@PulpCattel Not sure

Author: Made changes and added `onlynet=i2p`, also mentioned i2p as other option available for privacy in Bitcoin Core apart from Tor.

  Only connecting over Tor is more private when you combine it with no reachable IPv4/IPv6 address,
  in particular if you want to broadcast transactions without them being correlatable with your IP.

  On the other hand, if you only make random Tor connections, you're much more vulnerable to Sybil attacks
  (as Tor addresses have 0 cost to create, an attacker can just flood the network with 1000s of apparent Tor
  Bitcoin nodes, and have a high probability of receiving all outbound Tor connections a Tor-only node makes).
  This is significantly less a concern with IPv4/IPv6 (especially with asmap) due to cost of getting IPs in many
  networks. It's also less a concern if you have `-addnode` connections to trusted peers (even if they're onion addresses).

  If everyone used `onlynet=onion` nobody on the onion bitcoin chain would be able to communicate with the clearnet chain.
  It is essential that some nodes access both clearnet and Tor. If you only wish to give access to your node to other Tor users,
  do not use it.

## Setup Guide: Debian/Ubuntu

Assuming you already have an installation of Bitcoin Core:

**1. Install Tor:**

To install Tor, run:

```
sudo apt install tor
```

> 2. Edit Tor configuration file:

Reviewer 3: Since you made the first section `(1. Install Tor)` bold, as I suggested in this comment: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21157#discussion_r584419066. You have to make all other sections of this guide bold as I also suggested in the comment. That means lines `#250 (2. Edit Tor Configuration file:)`, `#265 (3. Add user to Tor group ("satoshi" in this example):`, `#271 (4. Restart Tor)`, `#279 (5. Edit Bitcoin configuration file)`, and `#290 (6. Confirmation)` must also go bold

```suggestion
**2. Edit Tor configuration file:**
```

Author: Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21157/commits/8a32230482f612bb6bb79eb18c249152fd5daae3

  Otherwise it is trivial to link them, which may reduce privacy. Onion
  services created automatically (as in section 2) always have only one port
  open.

- In some regions of the world the Tor network is monitored or blocked.
  If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections or the use
  of Tor bridges, then considering the trade-offs, it may not be safe to use Tor.

> - For maximum privacy, it is preferable to disable accepting incoming connections.

Reviewer 11: How would one disable incoming connections for an onion node? (`listen=0` and `listenonion=1` is not acceptable; see https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20769)

Author: > Edit: With a proxied tor connection, that is the default. Maybe that is what is meant here?

Yes

- Users can download packages with [torsocks](https://gitlab.torproject.org/legacy/trac/-/wikis/doc/torsocks) for better security and privacy.

- Trade-offs involved in using `onlynet=onion`:

  The `onlynet=onion` configuration option can potentially ensure the node attempts to only

>   connect over Tor. It is more private when you combine it with no reachable IPv4/IPv6 address,

Reviewer 11: perhaps put in parenthesis how this is achievable (bind=127.0.0.1:9050)?

Author: Yes `bind=onion` can be mentioned

Author: This is already mentioned above in the docs

>   connect over Tor. It is more private when you combine it with no reachable IPv4/IPv6 address,

Reviewer 11: perhaps put in parenthesis how this is achievable (bind=127.0.0.1:9050)?

  **Sybil Attacks**

  On the other hand, if you only make random Tor connections, you're much more vulnerable to Sybil attacks.
  As Tor addresses may be created at no cost, an attacker can potentially flood the network with many Tor
  nodes and receive all of the outbound Tor connections an `onlynet=tor` node makes.

  This is significantly less a concern with IPv4/IPv6 (especially with asmap) due to the cost of obtaining IPs in many
  networks. It's also alleviated if you make `-addnode` connections to trusted peers (even if they're onion addresses).

  If all of your connections are controlled by a Sybil attacker, they can easily prevent you from seeing confirmed transactions
  and, with more difficulty, even trick your node into falsely reporting a transaction as confirmed on the blockchain with most
  cumulative “chainwork”.

  **Network Partitioning**

  If too many nodes use `onlynet=onion`, it could become difficult for onion nodes to communicate with clearnet nodes,
  preventing the Tor network from seeing recent transactions and blocks. It is essential that some nodes access both

>   clearnet and Tor, or use `onlynet=i2p` with `onlynet=onion`.

Reviewer 11: link to i2p docs here?

Author: Sure I can use the link [/doc/i2p.md](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/22250/commits/afe5c3e70ad1abbdfdb0d47d101bbb984c9a5036#diff-629b3acb5e1cd9ad21f4f55bc95822e79f22f15da47f5de82284c15cbe8bb47b)

Author: Have added this in PR 22316

> ## Setup Guide: Debian/Ubuntu

Reviewer 11: Is this onward not just a duplication of lines 59-149? (Any changes should be edited in there).

Author: Lines 59-149 have lot of things in detail mentioned under `<h2>` header "Automatically create a Bitcoin Core onion service". The example here is just the basic steps required to quickly setup Bitcoin Core Onion Service without going in to details and skipping whole documentation or fix things in case confused after reading everything written above.

_What?_

The goal here was to mention 3 examples: Ubuntu, Windows and Ubuntu similar to https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/98913/how-to-run-bitcoin-core-as-onion-service-on-windows-ubuntu-and-android/

_Why?_

1. There can be few users who refer to this doc but find everything mentioned confusing and give up somewhere in between or miss some important steps.
2. We should avoid users searching for proper documentation in different websites, forums, blogs etc. and everyone should be able to follow the things easily using doc in this repository. Privacy should not be hard to achieve or at least the first steps should be easy and encouraging enough to motivate the user in learning more later.

So, the example is basically to skip all the things mentioned above. Run the commands and setup Bitcoin Core Onion Service in few minutes. Once the user can see that onion address and things working it will motivate him to read all the things mentioned in doc if interested to research more.

_How?_

I have added only Ubuntu in this doc because I was expecting if I try to add everything in one PR it will never get merged. I think I was wrong and PR is anyways not merged and its been months. So, I can add more things or look for more ACKs in this to get merged and do follow up PRs later.

I can remove Line 293 and 294 if required to make the example even shorter and just the basic things one needs to try Bitcoin Core onion service quickly.

Reviewer 11: > We should avoid users searching for proper documentation in different websites, forums, blogs etc. and everyone should be able to follow the things easily using doc in this repository

I agree strongly with this.

However, I still don't understand why the steps are duplicated here (it is written differently, but the steps are the same).
1. edit `torrc` file
2. Set:

> ControlPort 9051
> CookieAuthentication 1
> CookieAuthFileGroupReadable 1

3. Set up cookie authentication (add user to Tor group)

Your section "6. Confirmation" is duplicated in lines 8-16 (## How to see information about your Tor configuration via Bitcoin Core)

Author: Will plan on adding examples in a separate PR later. Appreciate your review and feedback.

Assuming you already have an installation of Bitcoin Core:

> **1. Install Tor:**

Reviewer 11: you could move this to Line 20

Author: Will plan on adding examples in a separate PR later. Appreciate your review and feedback.

  Otherwise it is trivial to link them, which may reduce privacy. Onion
  services created automatically (as in section 2) always have only one port
  open.

- If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections,
  and does not permit the public bridges, then considering the trade-offs
  it probably isn't safe enough to use the Tor network. Example: few places

>   in China and India

Reviewer: It may be more maintainable to not cite specific countries or regions, as situations can change.

Writing suggestion:

- If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections or public bridges, it may not be safe enough to use the Tor network.

Reviewer 12: who cares?
Doc's are changing too, and those two county's deserve to be called out now. imho.
I am glad to put this PR on my alert and TODO list and hail them for change instantly.

I know young devs ( not u ) have problems with dev or promoting Tor and calling out autocratic states and none of those devs must feel tempted to ACK here, but I had my life and can do this and give a shit if that is polite or not, if it is a fact.

Author: I had mentioned those two countries in this Q&A on Stackexchange: https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/98772/what-are-the-safe-ways-to-connect-to-bitcoin-network-using-tor

I found few things mentioned in an article about Tor issues and since I am from India I was aware of some incidents here.

One example from China: http://www.asianews.it/news-en/Beijing-arrests-engineer-who-tried-to-bypass-Internet-censorship-32691.html

One example from India: https://www.newslaundry.com/2020/03/05/kashmiris-use-vpn-to-skirt-internet-curbs-but-is-vpn-really-secure

Censorship in some parts of India is not only limited to Tor, VPN, speed of Internet etc. but a lot of times Internet is completely shutdown in last few years for days in some places: https://internetshutdowns.in/ (_Text messages work during such times so I had also worked on a side project to broadcast bitcoin transaction without Internet: https://github.com/prayank23/OfflineTx but thats not related to this PR_)

Reviewer 3: It's not a 'few places' in China and India; it is China and India as a whole. As you mentioned, you were aware of an incident. Others in your country may not be aware. It is better to include some warning in this doc to what we can here to prevent another incident. The part of the text does need a little work.

**From:** 
> If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections,
  and does not permit the public bridges, then considering the trade-offs
  it probably isn't safe enough to use the Tor network. Example: few places
  in China and India

**To:**

`Some states have the ability to monitor and block use of the Tor network. Recent examples include China and India. If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections or the use of Tor bridges, then considering the trade-offs, it may not be safe to use the Tor network.
`

Author: Removed China and India.

> - For maximal privacy, not listening at all is preferable over creating an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For maximal privacy, disabling listening may be preferable to running an
```

  Otherwise it is trivial to link them, which may reduce privacy. Onion
  services created automatically (as in section 2) always have only one port
  open.

- If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections,
  and does not permit the public bridges, then considering the trade-offs
  it probably isn't safe enough to use the Tor network. Example: few places
  in China and India

- For maximal privacy, disabling listening may be preferable to running an
  onion service.

> - Users can download packages with [torsocks](https://gitlab.torproject.org/legacy/trac/-/wikis/doc/torsocks) for better privacy.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Users can download packages with [torsocks](https://gitlab.torproject.org/legacy/trac/-/wikis/doc/torsocks) for better security and privacy.
```

  Otherwise it is trivial to link them, which may reduce privacy. Onion
  services created automatically (as in section 2) always have only one port
  open.

- If you are in an environment that does not permit direct Tor connections,
  and does not permit the public bridges, then considering the trade-offs
  it probably isn't safe enough to use the Tor network. Example: few places
  in China and India

- If someone is operating in paranoid mode then the correct move is to not
  listen at all on the node they are trying to protect, because any listening
  lets attackers actively connect into them. Frequently changing local onion

>   address will not be helpful.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this content, will let other reviewers weigh in.

Author: This was mentioned by Greg Maxwell when we were discussing about adding an option that deletes "onion private key" regularly: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/17491#issuecomment-705485718

Reviewer: I agree with Greg; am less sure about the rest of the two paragraphs and the writing could be improved, but better for others to weigh in.

Reviewer 4: I think this is formulated strangely. Sure, frequently changing onion addresses is silly, but nothing in this document is suggesting doing that. You're also not defining what "paranoid mode" means.

What about this instead?

> For maximal privacy, not listening at all is preferable over creating a hidden service.

Author: Done. Made changes in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21157/commits/46329146b3c111490960bf4072c83b3f9015a9c1 and replaced with:

_For maximal privacy, not listening at all is preferable over creating an onion service._

Since we have not mentioned about deleting "Onion Private Key" in this doc, maybe its best to edit the Bitcoin Wiki to remove or change that line: https://en.bitcoin.it/w/index.php?title=Setting_up_a_Tor_hidden_service
